Asparagus has long been a favourite vegetable but sadly, in the 20th century, fresh asparagus was almost replaced by the chartreuse-coloured canned version. Fortunately, in recent years, fresh asparagus has been making a comeback, both in the kitchen and in the garden.
Asparagus is grown from what’s called a ‘crown’, which is simply a fancy name for a bunch of fleshy roots. Crowns are sold during the plant’s dormant (winter) period, which is why it’s so important to get them in in the next few weeks.
Planting and growing asparagus is a long-term commitment. An asparagus clump that’s given a good start and some basic care will be capable of producing for fifteen years or more.
Start by choosing a well-drained spot in the garden. In cooler areas full sun is preferable, but in most Australian gardens asparagus appreciates a bit of dappled shade. And, even though deep digging is out of fashion, this is one case where the effort will really pay off. Cultivate a long bed to at least a spade’s depth. Mix in some Dynamic Lifter organic pellets and some Thrive All Purpose plant food. In most areas a sprinkling of lime will also be helpful.
Dig a planting trench that’s goes almost to the bottom of your pre-prepared asparagus bed and space the crowns along the base. Spread each clump over its own little mound of soil, and cover lightly. Continue to fill in the trench as the shoots grow. When the trench is full, mulch with a thick layer of organic matter (e.g. compost mixed with dried grass clippings).
The asparagus that we enjoy so much is actually the new emergent shoots. They’re called, appropriately, ‘spears’ because they do indeed spear their way out of the ground. These shouldn’t be cut in the first year, because they need to develop into leaves that can photosynthesise and feed the plant. Harvest can begin in the second year but, even then, it’s best to be light-handed. After that you’ll be able to enjoy abundant crops of your own fresh asparagus year after year.
In the second half of the growing season always let some fronds develop to store goodness in the plant. Asparagus dies down completely in winter (which sometimes worries first time growers) but it will unfailingly re-appear each spring. Remove and compost the dead ferns in autumn and feed in late winter or early spring with Yates Professional Blood & Bone. Renew the layer of mulch each year.
Asparagus is a good source of Vitamin C and is said to have cancer-fighting properties. But, most importantly, it tastes sensational when freshly picked.
Asparagus can be lightly steamed in the microwave oven and eaten with a dob of butter or a sprinkling of salt and pepper. To make a richer sauce for a special occasion, whisk four egg yolks, blend in 60g of softened butter and some grain mustard and serve over warm asparagus spears.


