Carrots are a fun veggie to grow as each time you pick a carrot it’s like pulling buried treasure out of the ground! They be used in so many ways – eaten crunchy and fresh by themselves, mixed into yummy salads or cooked until they are tender and delicious.
Planting tips
Carrots love soft soil which doesn’t have any hard lumps or stones in it – otherwise the carrots might grow into some weird shapes! So before sowing the seed, dig around in the soil really well and break up any hard pieces.
Carrots need at least 6 hours of sunshine a day, so sow your carrot seeds in a sunny spot.
Carrot seeds only need to be sown 6mm deep, so don’t be tempted to plant them too deeply otherwise they won’t be able to grow.
Growing Guidelines
Carrot seeds need to be kept moist while they are germinating. To help keep the soil moist, you can place some damp newspaper over the area where you’ve sown the seed (weighed down with some bricks or bits of wood). It’s really important to check under the newspaper every day to see if the seeds have started to sprout, and then remove the newspaper straight away.
When your carrot seedlings are about 5cm tall, they will probably need to be thinned out. This gives the carrots enough room to grow. You can then start feeding the seedlings each week with a liquid fertiliser like Yates Thrive Liquid All Purpose, which helps them grow in to big delicious carrots.
Companion Planting
Planting chives with carrots may help to deter carrot fly, which is an insect pest of carrots. As an added bonus, the chives will be ready to pick before the carrots and you can use them in lunch box treats like delicious cheesy muffins. 
Problems to look out for
Dry soil – it’s really important that carrot seeds are kept moist while they are germinating.
Harvesting tips
You can start picking some baby carrots as soon as they are big enough to eat and then leave the rest in the ground to harvest gradually over the next few months.
A fun thing to do with home grown carrots is to leave some of the green stems on the top of the carrot to use as ‘carrot handles’ – it gives you something to hold on to as you nibble them!


