Pumpkins make a tasty and nutritious addition to many meals and are relatively easy to grow in the home garden. JERRY COLEBY-WILLIAMS shares his top tips and advice for growing these wonderfully versatile golden vegetables.
Pumpkins (Cucubita spp.) are members of the Cucurbitaceae family along with zucchini, gourd, squash and cucumber. Technically a fruit, pumpkins have been in cultivation for more than 5000 years. This diverse group of frost-tender annuals and perennials has varied shapes, sizes, colours and patterns. Individual fruits can weigh from 1–600kg. The largest pumpkin on record was grown in the USA, weighing 667kg. 

Getting started 
Pumpkin vines need fertile, compost-rich, well-drained soil in full sun and are most easily grown as ground-cover plants. Bushy varieties, like Golden Nugget, can be container-grown, but most are too vigorous for pots. Vines can be trained over frames provided they can support the weight of the heavy fruit. 

In frost-free tropical and subtropical gardens, pumpkins can be grown all year round. In temperate Australia plant or sow outside after the last frost. In cold climates sow pumpkins indoors or in a glasshouse so they can be planted immediately after the last frost to gain the full benefit of short summers. 

Diverse varieties
The diversity of pumpkins equals that of tomatoes. Golden Nugget is best for small gardens. For gardeners who want record-breakers, Atlantic Giant produces massive fruit. Jap suits the tropical north, while Butternut crops reliably anywhere. Turk’s Turban is an exotic-looking pumpkin (although its flavour is a little dry). There are Australian regional varieties, too. Beaudesert Blue and Queensland Blue come from Queensland and Jarrahdale is from Western Australia.

Planting and growing
Pumpkin seed needs a soil temperature of 20?C for germination. Raise seedlings by sowing them individually in 10cm pots and plant when pots are filled with roots. Alternatively, sow seed or plant seedlings into mounds of rich compost formed over loosened soil. Plants take 70–120 days to mature. As pumpkins are shallow-rooted they need regular watering in dry or windy weather. Even moisture helps prevent fruit splitting. 

Pumpkins produce short-lived male and female flowers that can close by mid-morning. Female flowers open above the swollen, distinctive embryo fruit and male flowers produce pollen. Native and honey bees are normally able to complete pollination, but sometimes ants harvest pollen before this occurs. High temperatures can affect fruit formation – over 30?C, hand pollination is useful for improving fruit set. To hand pollinate, pick male flowers, remove petals then dab pollen on the stigma of female flowers. Squeezing female flowers aids pollination in wet weather.

Adults and the larvae of leaf-eating ladybirds, which are also known as 28-spotted ladybirds, eat pumpkin leaves, so hand-pick them regularly. Watering in the morning and spraying fortnightly with a solution of one part cows milk to 10 parts water helps prevent mildew. Mildew-eating ladybirds, which are patterned with yellow and black bands, help control mildew naturally. 

Harvesting and storing 
Pinch out growing tips of rambling stems to contain plants. When fruits are finished swelling, remove them with as much of the stalk as possible. Ripe fruits with unbroken skin store very well if kept in a cool, dry, well-ventilated space. Seed can be saved from fruit one month after harvesting them. Scoop seed from flesh, wash, dry and store in a cool, dry spot away from sunlight. To ensure seed-grown progeny comes true, save seed from one variety grown in isolation.


