Cauliflowers are a strange looking veggie, but are delicious in dishes like mashed cauliflower, cheesy cauliflower bake and cauliflower ‘rice’. They taste even better when you grow them yourself!
Planting Tips
It’s best to sow your cauliflower seeds in a small pot, tray or punnet first before transplanting the small seedlings into the garden. (Note – use an image of a seedling punnet).
While the seeds are starting to grow, mix some Yates Dynamic Lifter into the garden bed where you’re going to plant them for a great start. Cauliflowers need at least 6 hours of sunshine a day, so plant your cauliflower seedlings in a sunny spot.
Growing Guidelines
Avoid planting cauliflowers in a garden bed where you may have grown cauliflowers, broccoli or cabbages in the last 2 years to reduce plant diseases.
Plant your cauliflower seedlings about 50cm apart so they have plenty of space to grow.
To grow big healthy cauliflowers, feed them each week with a liquid fertiliser like Yates Thrive Liquid All Purpose.
Companion Planting
Cauliflowers really like being planted with beans. Beans add nitrogen to the soil, which cauliflowers use to grow green healthy leaves. You could grow beans up a tripod in the garden and plant your cauliflowers around it.
Problems to look out for
Snails and slugs love eating cauliflower seedlings! Protect the seedlings by scattering a few Yates Blitzem Snail and Slug Pellets around the garden bed, but make sure you get a grown up to do this for you.
Caterpillars and aphids also like to eat cauliflowers, which can leave you with nothing! If you start to see holes in leaves (from caterpillars) or the leaves curling up (could be aphids) give the plants a spray every 7 – 14 days with Yates Pyrethrum Insect Pest Gun. Make sure you get a grown up to do this for you.
The head or curd of the cauliflower (which is what the white bit is called) can also get sunburnt, just like you and I. You can protect the curd from the sun by lying 1 or 2 cauliflower leaves over the top, but don’t put sunscreen on it!
Harvesting tips
*Pick your cauliflower when the curd is still firm and tight and about 20cm across.

