Kaylah's Day At The Beach 
On Saturday morning Kaylah woke up bright and early. Today was the day they were going to the beach. Kaylah packed her backpack with her swimmers, a towel and a chocolate biscuit – just in case she got hungry. After breakfast Kaylah and her family got into the car and set off for the beach. When they got there, Kaylah was so excited that she forgot to put her backpack down and ran straight into the water. When she was about halfway out into the ocean, Kaylah saw a big wave behind her that began to wash her out deeper into the ocean. 
Kaylah landed on an island she had never seen before and she was frightened. She began to walk. Suddenly, Kaylah stepped on something in the sand. Kaylah began to dig, finally pulling the object up. It was a small chest with pretty diamonds on the front. Kaylah slowly opened it up. Inside she found lots of sparkly jewelry. There were necklaces, rings and bracelets, all in pretty colours. Kaylah thought to herself – Lucky I brought my backpack because my mum loves jewelry. 
While Kaylah was collecting the jewelry, she began to hear loud thumps. She did not know where they were coming from. Soon the whole island began to shake and Kaylah fell over. Being brave, Kaylah began to walk and finally saw what was making those thumps. A giant! He had big, mean eyes and fat fingers. Kaylah was very scared. 
“What are you doing with my jewelry?” yelled to giant, in a deep voice. “I didn’t know they were your jewels, replied Kaylah. “Can I make a deal with you, Mr Giant? I have a chocolate biscuit and I will let you have it if I can have one necklace for my mother.” The giant thought about it for a second. “Ok, it’s been a long time since I have had chocolate biscuits and they’re my favourites!” Kaylah gave the giant her biscuit and the giant allowed Kaylah to pick her favourite necklace. “Thank you so much” said Kaylah. “My mum will love it.” 
The giant said kindly, “Thank you for being nice to me. Would you like me to take you back to your parents now?” “How will you get me there?” Kaylah asked. “I have a row boat that I built myself but I don’t row much because I have no one to go and visit.” replied the Giant. “Maybe you can come and visit me sometime. We could play games and be real friends” Kaylah said. “That would be nice” laughed the giant. The giant got his boat and started to row back to the beach where Kaylah found her parents.
That night when Kaylah got home she gave her mother the necklace. Her mother was surprised and smiled. “It’s beautiful Kaylah, where did you get this necklace from?” Kaylah smiled and said, “Mum you would not believe me if I told you!

THE END

