Lemon Cake with Coconut

1. Preheat oven to 160°C. Brush a round 22cm (base measurement) cake pan with melted butter to grease. Line the base and side with non-stick baking paper.
2. Use an electric beater to beat together butter, sugar and coconut essence in a bowl until pale and creamy. Add eggs, 1 at a time, beating well after each addition until combined. Stir in coconut, flours and yoghurt until combined. Spoon mixture into pan. Bake in oven for 11/2 hours or until a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. Remove from oven and turn onto a wire rack to cool completely.
3. Meanwhile, to make the lemon curd, combine lemon juice, rind and cornflour in a saucepan. Add butter, sugar and egg and place over low heat. Cook, stirring, for 5 minutes or until mixture thickens. Strain through a fine sieve into a heatproof bowl. Set aside for 5 minutes to cool. Cover with plastic wrap and place in the fridge for 2 hours to chill.
4. Meanwhile, to make the candied citrus rind, use a zester to remove rind from the orange, grapefruit and lemon. (Alternatively, use a vegetable peeler to remove skin. Use a sharp knife to remove white pith and cut rind into very thin strips.) Line a baking tray with non-stick baking paper. Combine rind, sugar and water in a saucepan over low heat and cook, stirring, until sugar dissolves. Increase heat to medium and bring to the boil. Gently boil, brushing down side of pan with a pastry brush dipped in water, for 5 minutes or until rind is translucent. Remove from heat. Use a fork to remove rind and spread in a single layer over tray. Set aside for 5 minutes to set.
5. To make glace icing, combine icing sugar and butter in a heatproof bowl. Gradually add the milk, stirring with a wooden spoon until a firm paste forms. Place bowl over a saucepan half-filled with simmering water. Stir over low heat for 5 minutes or until icing is runny.
6. To decorate:
7. Use a large serrated knife to cut cake into 3 even layers.
8. Place bottom layer on a cake stand or plate and spread with half the lemon curd. Repeat with second layer of cake and remaining lemon curd. Top with remaining cake.
9. Pour glace icing over cake, allowing it to drizzle over the side. Set aside for 10 minutes to set.
10. Sprinkle candied citrus rind over the top of the cake to decorate.

