Lemon and Yoghurt Syrup Cake

Equipment
 You will need six 125ml (1/2 cup) dariole moulds for this recipe.

Ingredients
 60ml (1/4 cup) solid coconut oil
 2 1/2 tablespoons coconut sugar
 150g (1 cup) white spelt flour, sifted
 2 eggs, separated
 1/2 teaspoon baking powder
 1/4 teaspoon bicarbonate of soda
 2 teaspoons lemon rind, finely grated
 150ml low-fat Greek yoghurt
 2 tablespoons lemon juice
 Low-fat Greek yoghurt, extra, to serve
Lemon syrup
 60ml (1/4 cup) lemon juice
 2 tablespoons coconut sugar
 1 lemon, zested
 Select all ingredients
Add to my Shopping List
1. Preheat oven to 180C/160C fan forced. Grease six 125ml (1/2 cup) dariole moulds and line the bases with baking paper. Use electric beaters to beat the oil and sugar in a bowl until pale and creamy. Add 2 tbs of the flour and beat until combined. Add yolks, 1 at a time, beating well after each addition. Stir in baking powder, bicarb, lemon rind and half the remaining flour. Stir in half the yoghurt and half the lemon juice. Repeat with the remaining flour, yoghurt and lemon juice, stirring until a stiff batter forms.
2. Use clean electric beaters to beat egg whites in a clean dry bowl until soft peaks form. Fold half the egg white mixture into the batter. Fold in the remaining egg whites. Spoon into the prepared moulds. Place on a baking tray and bake for 20-22 minutes or until a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. Cool in moulds for 5 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack set over a baking tray. Use a skewer to poke 3 holes in each cake.
3. Meanwhile, for the lemon syrup, combine the juice and sugar in a saucepan over low heat. Cook, stirring, for 2 minutes or until sugar dissolves. Bring to a simmer. Simmer, without stirring, for 2 minutes. Add lemon zest. Simmer for a further 1 minute or until thick.
4. Pour half the syrup over warm cakes. Set aside to cool completely.
5. Serve the cakes topped with a spoonful of yoghurt and drizzled with the remaining syrup.

