Death on Deadline

There is an art to asking questions; any reporter will tell you that.

Never ask a question that can be answered with a yes or no.
Always ask the easiest questions first.

And when someone is sharing a heartfelt story, empathize. Help them along. Murmur where you need to, nod where it helps, stay supportive, be patient –and most importantly, don’t interrupt.

It’s not about you.

They talk. You listen. You ask. They tell. It’s like a dance. But for the rest of the day, I’d lost my rhythm. I went out on my interviews, I asked the right questions, I stumbled along well enough to get the answers I needed. Then I sat down to write. But I have to admit, I wasn’t doing so great. And it wasn’t the police scanner, the co-worker chatter, the television sets or the anxious editors who were distracting me.

My mind was wandering – lots of places. It was in my kitchen, trying to figure out what I would fix for an impromptu feast for Sandy and Brody. It was back in time, fixated on the perhaps untimely demise of my boss.

And okay, I have to admit, it was straying toward questions that were quite possibly none of my business.
Like first and foremost – would someone really kill Harrison Fielding? I wasn’t buying my own lame theory I’d sold to Sandy. Really, if you’re allergic to chocolate, would you be picking up a brownie in the first place?

Secondly, if so, who? Was Jess under suspicion? Sandy? Me? Surely not. But then again ... I pulled open my desk drawer to where my brownie was still wrapped in its paper napkin, and hesitated just a second before I took a bite.

It was yes, a little stale, but decidedly delicious.
I chewed slowly, realizing I was anticipating something. What? What was I waiting for? To keel over, drop dead? I shook my head, impatient with myself. Sandy was my best friend. She wouldn’t hurt anyone. And besides, if she had a murder planned, no way would I not know about it. The girl couldn’t keep a secret to save her life. Literally.

I savored the chocolate on my tongue as I pondered the last question in my mind. Why in the world would John Brody horn in on my dinner invitation? Part of me –admittedly the vain part – wondered if he was attracted to me. And even the vain me wasn’t sure how I felt about that.

Yes, I was a little older than him, but, well, not that much older. Not gross older, or cougar older. I could see it. Sort of. But the other part of me – the cynical part – wondered if he were just nosy, or, maybe, maybe even something else. Like, suspicious. Of my best friend. I wondered suddenly if he were there undercover, to report back to the police he’d become so chummy with over the past few months.

I shook my head. That was ridiculous. There was, of course, the not-too-unlikely option that he simply honestly thought he’d been invited. He was standing right there, after all.
I rubbed my eyes. These theories would have to wait. And if I didn’t get this story done, they’d be waiting forever.

I flipped open my notebook, and requested a little guidance.

"Dan," I called out. "What’s the length?"

"10 to 12," he called back from the coffeemaker, where he was refilling yet again the bottomless cup that’s both a stereotype and a truth in the newsroom.

"Do I have a jump?" I called.

"No," he said, his voice returning to a normal volume as he sat down at his desk, just two away from mine. "Write tight."

Well, poop.


