The 3 most important things on a profile

If you've been on eHarmony for a little while, you’re used to receiving profiles. Some are long, some are short, some are funny and some might make you cringe. But all of them tend to blur into one after long enough.
As such, we run the risk of skimming profiles and ignoring a potential match made in heaven. The good news is that although eHarmony will make sure to only match you with like-minded people, you can easily vet a profile when you know what part of a profile matters, and what doesn’t. We spoke to psychologist and Dating Coach Melanie Schilling, to uncover the three important features you should pay attention to:
1. Their religion
… Or anything else that is fundamental to who you are and how you live your life. “Things like family, religion, health, honesty – they define you and help you decide what is important in your life,” explains Mel. Whatever you decide are your top three values, pursue profiles looking for things that show you two are in sync. “Once you get your values right, the superficial is less important,” says Mel. Click here to test your own values.
2. Their photos
No, no, not just because you’re looking for Jessica Alba or George Clooney’s twin, but because the old adage is true: a picture can tell a thousand words. Do they look happy? Do they include lots of photos of them doing stuff you love to do? Look for clues into their personality, and that their values might be similar to your own. For example, if all their shots are at campgrounds and you’re more of a trendy city boutique hotel type, alarm bells should ring.
3. Your Deal Breakers
“Genuine deal breakers are typically linked to your values and are absolutely not negotiable,” says Mel. That is, if someone showed up in your matches and had one of your deal breakers in their pocket, you would not engage with them. “Be careful to differentiate between deal breakers and relationship preferences – preferences tend to be more flexible and if all your values boxes are ticked, you might overlook if a preference is lacking,” warns Mel.
