Plum and Custard Streusel Cake

Ingredients
 8 (1/2 x 500g tub) whole plums in natural juice, drained
 200g butter, softened
 1 cup caster sugar
 2 teaspoons vanilla essence
 3 eggs
 2 1/4 cups self-raising flour
 1/2 cup milk
 Extra 25g butter, chilled, chopped
 1/4 cup slivered almonds
 Double cream, to serve
Custard
 2 tablespoons vanilla custard powder
 2 cups milk
Streusel
 1/4 cup brown sugar
 2/3 cup crumbed walnuts (see note)
 1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
 Select all ingredients
Add to my Shopping List
1. Make Custard: Blend custard powder with a little of the milk in a small saucepan until smooth. Gradually stir in remaining milk. Place over medium heat. Cook, stirring constantly, for 5 minutes or until custard thickens (do not boil). Remove from heat. Cover surface with plastic wrap. Cool to room temperature.
2. Preheat oven to 170C/150C fan-forced. Grease a 6cm-deep, 23cm-round cake pan. Line base and sides with 2 layers baking paper, extending paper 2cm above edge of pan. Drain plums on paper towel. Pat dry. Halve plums. Remove and discard seeds.
3. Make Streusel: Combine all the ingredients in a bowl.
4. Using an electric mixer, beat butter, sugar and essence for 5 minutes or until light and fluffy. Add eggs, 1 at a time, beating until combined after each addition. Stir in 2 cups of flour and the milk, in 2 batches. Spread half the batter over base of prepared pan. Sprinkle with half the streusel. Using a small spoon, dollop custard over streusel. Gently smooth with the back of the spoon to cover completely. Arrange plums evenly over custard. Spoon remaining batter evenly over plums, spreading gently to cover.
5. Add extra flour and butter to remaining streusel. Using fingers, rub butter and flour into streusel until well combined. Add almonds. Mix well. Sprinkle streusel evenly over top of cake. Bake for 1 hour 30 minutes or until centre of cake is firm to touch (cover cake loosely with foil if over-browning during cooking). Stand cake in pan for 15 minutes. Carefully turn, top-side up, onto a wire rack to cool. Serve cake warm or cold with double cream.

